# Chimp-Drumming
Code and data for papers on chimpanzee drumming

Many animal species use vocal and non-vocal acoustic signals to communicate over large distances. Wild chimpanzees drum on the buttress roots of trees, generating low-frequency sounds that can reach distances of over one kilometre. Buttress drumming is produced in bouts of beats and often accompanies pant-hoots, the species-typical long-distance vocalization. 

Paper 1: Form and Function of Chimpanzee Drumming
We investigated whether individual differences exist in the acoustic structure of drumming bouts produced by male chimpanzees of the Waibira community in the Budongo Forest in Uganda, and whether individual, contextual, and social factors affected their use of drumming. Individual differences were found in drumming bouts producted during travel events, as well as in their timing within the pant-hoot, and specific patterns of beats could be discriminated for some chimpanzees. In contrast, no individual differences were found in the acoustic structure of drumming bouts produced by the same focal individuals during displays. Together these findings suggest that chimpanzees can choose to encode identity within individual drumming 'signatures'. Chimpanzees drummed less frequently as their party size increased. We found no evidence that the age of the signaller or the presence of preferred social partners, higher-ranking males, or females in oestrous affected the use of drumming. These findings reveal the flelxibility of buttress drumming across socia land behaivoural contexts and provide support for the hypothesis that, by encoding individua lidentity, long-distance drumming may be used to facilitate chimpanzee fission-fusion social dynamics.


Paper 2: Selectivity in buttress drumming tree properties among chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) of the Waibira community in Budongo Forest, Uganda.
Wild chimpanzees drum on tree buttresses during dominance displays and travel, generating low-frequency sounds that are audible over distances of more than one kilometre. Western chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) in the Nimba Mountains of Guinea selectively choose trees and buttresses when drumming, potentially based on their resonant properties (Fitzgerald et al., 2022), suggesting that these chimpanzees are optimising their drumming signals. We investigated whether male Eastern chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) in the Budongo Forest, Uganda, also show preferences in tree and buttress choice, exploring whether selectivity is a species-wide feature. We tested chimpanzee preferences for tree species and diameter, number of buttresses, and buttress area and width, by comparing trees (N=18) and buttresses (N=53) used in drumming bouts with nearby unused trees (N=203) and buttresses (N=380). We found that Waibira chimpanzees drummed preferentially on two tree species: the tropical hardwood Cynometra alexandrii and the softwood Chrysophyllum albidum. Chimpanzees selected trees with a larger diameter over nearby trees with a smaller diameter, and buttresses were more likely to be used for drumming if they had a larger area or larger width. These results suggest that chimpanzees in the Waibira community select trees and buttresses based on physical properties, most likely related to acoustically relevant characteristics. These findings support the argument that buttress drumming is a goal-directed behaviour and contribute to our understanding of chimpanzees’ use and optimisation of their long-distance acoustic signals.


Paper 3: Drumming across chimpanzee individuals, communities, and populations.
We analyse the temporal structure of drumming bouts, the use of individual beat patterns, and whether and how individuals incorporate pant-hoot vocalizations with their drumming to explore individual and/or community-level patterns in drumming structure and in the combination of drumming and pant-hooting. Variation in tree species and size, and the size and shape of the buttress root may impact the resonance properties of the drumming substrates available, we explore this in a subset of the data (Sonso and Waibira).

